---
title: Introduction
has_children: false
nav_order: 1
published: true
---

# Introduction
Welcome to Fluxtion service starter, hope you enjoy exploring :)

The service starter manages the deterministic execution of start and stop tasks for a set of interdependent services. 
Tasks are triggered on services as parent services are successfully completed. 

## Overview
In many systems services execute independently but need to co-ordinate their lifecycle with each other. A service
may require all downstream services to be started before starting and becoming available to accept upstream requests.

Similarly, if a downstream service becomes unavailable all upstream services will need to be notified and take appropriate
actions, gracefully shutting down services starting with external facing services and working back towards the failed
service.

As systems grow a complex graph of interdependent services quickly arises. The difficulty in correctly managing
lifecycle overwhelms a handwritten manual solution and can result in brittle non-deterministic behaviour that services rely upon. 

Service starter is a library utility that manages the lifecycle of independent services, executing start and stop tasks 
associated with a particular service at the correct time.

### Main components
- **[ServiceManager](//github.com/gregv12/fluxtion-service-starter/blob/master/src/main/java/com/fluxtion/example/servicestater/ServiceManager.java)** 
  manages the execution of lifecycle tasks associated with a service.
- **[Service](https://github.com/gregv12/fluxtion-service-starter/blob/master/src/main/java/com/fluxtion/example/servicestater/Service.java#L20)** - 
- To manage a user service a proxy Service is instantiated and registered with the ServiceManager.
  An external service has a one to one mapping with a Service. Data held by the Service:
    - name - a unique service name that can be identified globally
    - dependents - Downstream services that require this service to be started for validity
    - requirements - Upstream services that must be started for this service to be valid 
    - start task - an optional task that is executed when the service enters the STARTING lifecycle phase
    - stop task - an optional task that is executed when the service enters the STOPPING lifecycle phase
- **[TaskExecutor](https://github.com/gregv12/fluxtion-service-starter/blob/master/src/main/java/com/fluxtion/example/servicestater/TaskWrapper.java#L37)** 
- Consumes start/stop tasks generated by the ServiceManager and optionally executes the tasks. A default implementation
  is configured [SynchronousTaskExecutor](https://github.com/gregv12/fluxtion-service-starter/blob/master/src/main/java/com/fluxtion/example/servicestater/helpers/SynchronousTaskExecutor.java)
  that executes tasks on the callers thread. An [AsynchronousTaskExecutor](https://github.com/gregv12/fluxtion-service-starter/blob/master/src/main/java/com/fluxtion/example/servicestater/helpers/ASynchronousTaskExecutor.java)
  is available as an alternate execution strategy.
